The Hole is a Victorian survival text-based online game. Many players can play simultaneously, occupying the same world, but not interacting directly. The proposed setting for The Hole is a "dungeon", themed as a massive insane asylum (named, of course, The Hole).

Gameplay consists of traversing a dungeon and writing journal entries. Players are strongly encouraged to use these journal entries to develop their characters. Game mechanics are practically non-existent - while an inventory system exists and players can come across monsters within the dungeon, it is entirely up to the players to determine what happens. While this does, of course, allow players to handwave away all obstacles, we hope that this would not occur for the following reasons: 1) the game is intended to appeal in both design and aesthetic to those genuinely interested in RP (the game is purely textual), 2) as there are few objectively difficult challenges it is expected that those uninterested in RP will find little to do. The proposed setting of an insane asylum would even provide an in-universe explanation for those who do handwave their characters through the game (delusions!).

After sign-up, players would be presented with a character creation screen. On this screen, they could enter a character name and write a character backstory (this backstory would serve as the character's first journal entry). Players could potentially be presented with character prompts (eg., specific mental disorders, character, professions, etc.), but as these are intended purely as creativity prompts, players would be completely unconstrained by them.

Newly created players would be placed in a previously unexplored section of The Hole. They would wander the dungeon (which would be randomly generated as they go) for a short time before potentially coming across previously generated rooms. Before exiting each room, players would be required to write a journal entry (a [relatively short] minimum length is likely a good idea). The hope is that these journal entries would collectively develop both the character and the dungeon.

Upon entering a previously generated room, the player would be presented with a compilation of journal entries written in that room; this would give them the current "state" of the room. They would also be presented with a list of items (added at time of room creation or dropped by deceased players/monsters) which they could add to their inventory. Enforcing a limit to the number of items a character can carry would force them to think more carefully about which items they take, thus contributing to story-telling. One idea is for players to have the option of leaving a "puzzle item" in rooms. They would compose a riddle and supply the answer. Upon entering a room with a puzzle, players could attempt to guess the answer. The first player to be successful would be rewarded with a random item and the chance to write their own puzzle

As a survival-themed game, players would likely be required to eat and possibly sleep regularly lest they suffer detrimental effects. Note that these effects would be purely descriptive (eg., an information panel saying something like "Your character is famished!"); it is possible that ignoring these effects could result in the death of the character.

Upon the death of a character, the player will be prompted to write a final journal entry, finishing the story of that character. Their corpse and possessions would be left in the room of their death; characters subsequently entering said room would see this noted in the room description along with the journal entries. Players could then create a new character and begin a new adventure, possibly coming across rooms visited by one of their other characters. Dead characters' journals would be archived and (probably) made publicly available; this would form one major part of the story-telling exercise (the others being the stories of individual rooms and the collective Hole [pun intended]).

The hopeful outcome of the entire game would be to create many interwoven story arcs. Individual players' would write their own characters' stories but would be meanwhile contributing to the stories of the rooms they visit. Also hoped is that the community of players would eventually create setting lore from their cumulative contributions.